[id=authentication]
== Understanding authentication in Unity

Unity offers a LOT in terms of authentication. In this section we give an overview of what is possible
and where to search the concrete settings. 

First of all, as Unity often acts as authentication proxy it needs to be understood that by 
'authentication in Unity' we understand authentication Unity's client, as performed for internal 
Unity purposes. This authentication can be (and often is) a part of a larger process, where an external service
asks Unity to authenticate its client (e.g. using OAuth or SAML). However such fact is irrelevant:
in Unity authentication works in the very same way regardless whether is was initiated by redirection 
from 3rd party service or directly by a person or agent accessing Unity.

Each Unity endpoint (regardless whether it is WebAdmin UI, web OAuth IdP or SOAP SAML Attribute Authority) 
requires its client to authenticate itself. Therefore administrator has to configure authentication per
endpoint.

Authentication of an endpoint is controlled using two main elements:

* Authentication realm - controls settings which may be shared by multiple endpoints with similar security
requirements. Those settings include in the first place session configuration. 
Endpoints in the same realm share login sessions and all their settings, therefore Single-Sign-On (SSO)
is configured by assigning endpoints to the same realm. See <<realms>>.
* Authentication flows - flow defines an authentication process. It is used to configure what 1st factor authentication
should be used, what is the policy to trigger two factor authentication (2FA/MFA) and what are the 2nd factor 
authentication options. For simplicity an endpoint may have also an individual authentication options directly assigned.
This is a shortcut for configuring an authentication flow with only the 1st factor enabled. See <<authn-flows>>.

That said access to an endpoint may be protected by alternative authentication options: e.g. remote OAuth login or
a local password with additional 2nd factor using SMS code. Those individual authentication options are provided by 
components which are called authenticators. See <<cfg-authenticators>>. Authenticator can provide a single 
authentication option (as the password authenticator) or many of them (as the remote SAML authenticator allowing
to use all federation IdPs).

Authentication screen can be configured to organize the authentication options in a desired way. This
is especially important if there is many of them. See <<endpoints-authn>> for details.

=== Local authentication 

Local authenticators use a locally stored credential to verify the client's identity. Local authentication
is simple in that sense that it can result only in two states: valid or invalid. Local authenticators
have a very simple configuration (usually limited to a displayed name of the authenticator) as are
using the configuration of an associated local credential. 

Local authentication can be supported by the public registration forms. Each registration form which is 
marked as public (in the general settings of registration form) can be attached to the endpoint to offer
the manual registration. Details on registration forms are given in <<registration>>. For information
how to configure registration forms for web endpoints (non-web endpoints naturally do not support this feature)
see <<endpoints-authn>>.

The lost password reset feature can be configured in password credential configuration. 

=== Remote authentication

Remote authentication is more complicated then the local one. In remote authentication an external authentication server
is contacted and asked to authenticate the client. The details are dependent on actual authenticator: some redirect
the user's browser, some are contacting the remote server directly as in LDAP case.

Remote authenticator has a rather complex configuration. The authentication process using a remote
authenticator works as follows:

1. The remote authenticator contacts the remote server in a protocol specific way to obtain 
an information about the logged user.
2. If the remote login was successful the remotely provided data is mapped to the local representation
(translated, enhanced, filtered...) using an _input translation profile_ which is assigned to the 
authenticator. Input translation profiles are discussed in <<translation>>. In effect of translation: 
	* The remote user may be mapped to an existing account (at not-the-first login
	or when it is possible to automatically map remote user to local account using some attribute as email). 
	In such case authentication is finished just after the translation.
	* The remote user may not be mapped to any identity. In such case authentication fails.
	* Finally a user (who is logging for the first time) may be mapped to an identity which does not exist
	in Unity database. In such case user can have a choice: either to fill a registration form 
	to create a new local account or to associate the remote identity with an existing local account manually.
	
Registration of unknown users is performed by using a very flexible mechanism of registration forms
described in <<registration>>. To enable registration of unknown remote users
a chosen registration form must be associated with an authenticator. See authenticator's documentation 
for details how to do this. Note that some authenticators allow for setting different registration 
forms per each remote identity provider. Registration forms may be configured to be automatically or
manually accepted, also subject to dynamic conditions. 

Account association is enabled by default. It requires additional login to the existing account in a 
popup window. It can be turned off in authenticator settings.
	
Additionally it can be noted that translation profiles are very powerful. Translation profile
can not only map the remote identity to a local representation but also it can be configured 
to automatically create identities missing locally. In such case neither registration nor association 
will be used as authentication will always complete. 


=== Step-up and repeated authentication

For certain sensitive operations Unity may be configured (and by default is) to require additional or step-up
authentication. When this happens Unity asks an already logged user, to provide a single credential before operation
is performed.

Operation may be classified as sensitive -- and be subject to additional authentication -- only when it is 
invoked by a user with ordinary permissions. Operations invoked by admins are always treated specially and 
additional authentication is alwyas skipped. There are two classes of sensitive operations:

 * Credential change by credential owner. This applies only to the change of existing credential, initial 
 setup of a credential is not treated as sensitive operation.
 * Sensitive attribute change by owner. Attribute is assumed to be sensitive basing on its type metadata. Attribute 
 types with _contact email_, _contact mobile_, _sensitive_ metadata have their attributes protected. Note that sensitive
 attribute must also have "Self modify" flag set to be exposed for modification by its owner, which can trigger 
 additional authentication.
 
Administrator can configure the additional authentication policy in the main server configuration file. 
Configuration is composed from three elements. The main one governs which authenticator is used for 
additional authentication. It must be always an authenticator which does not require web browser redirection 
(as remote OAuth) and it must be available on the endpoint. Typically policy is configured with constants which 
are resolved at runtime. The default policy is as follows:

----
unityServer.core.reAuthenticationPolicy=SESSION_2F CURRENT SESSION_1F ENDPOINT_2F
unityServer.core.reAuthenticationBlockOnNoOption=true
unityServer.core.reAuthenticationGraceTime=60
----

According to the default policy, for each sensitive operation server will check in order:

. if user was logged with 2 factors, then 2nd factor is used for additional authentication
. if user is changing credential then this credential (before change) is used (if its authenticator is on the endpoint)
. the first factor credential of the user's session is used, if it is available on the endpoint
. the 2nf factor credential configured for the endpoint is used if it is available for the user

The remaining option can be used to control for how long additional authentication is valid (i.e. after setting it
to 600s then user won't need to perform additional authentication for one minute) and whether to block operation
if there is no applicable additional authentication authenticator for the user (what typically means that system
is misconfigured).    

