[id=introduction]
== What (for) is Unity?

In short Unity is a *complete solution for identity, federation and inter-federation management*.
Or, looking from a different perspective, it is an *extremely flexible authentication
service*.


Unity allows its administrators to enable authentication (or login) using various protocols, with different 
configurations for many relaying parties. The actual authentication can be performed using 
the built-in, feature-rich users database or can be delegated to
one of supported upstream identity providers (IdPs). The information obtained from upstream IdPs can be flexibly 
translated and merged with the local database (if needed) and re-exported using other protocols.
Those fundamental usage patterns are shown on the following figure:  

image::./figures/general.png[alt="Unity general function as a versatile authentication platform",align="center",scaledwidth="50%"]

What is important to underline here: 

[.red]*Unity is NOT yet another bundle of several, coupled together systems.* 
It is a solution built from the ground up. All pieces perfectly fit together. Startup is fast. Administration of all 
parts is performed in the same style. And the whole solution is fully web and cloud ready.

[NOTE]
Unity is under heavy development. Not all extensions and functions of the engine which are on the presented
figures are already available. Even some of the enumerated use-cases are not already fully achievable. 
We plan to deliver the remaining fundamental (and many other) features soon. For the actual and detailed information on
what is currently supported please check the <<features-info>> section.  

The most important design principles of Unity are:

- *Simplicity* There are tons of competitive solutions, but we found most of them terribly difficult to install and
maintain. We try hard to make Unity as user friendly as possible.
- *Extensibility* There is a plethora of authentication protocols, credential systems, IDM solutions and 
issues related to their coordination. We can't support all of them right from the start. But we should be able to 
seamlessly support most, if not all, of them. Unity is designed to be truly extensible in all places 
where it makes sense to do so.
- *Security* We doesn't provide inherently insecure solutions in Unity. No, it is not possible to use MD5 or SHA1 password hashes
in the local database.



=== Use cases

We believe that the amount of Unity use-cases is endless. Here are some:


. Web application developers want to secure it with authentication, provide user accounts with different authorization
roles (admin, customer, ...) and a couple of personal attributes.
[none]
- icon:check[role="green"] Instead of developing the system, this whole functionality can be outsourced to Unity, 
	after a simple step of integration with the protocol of choice as SAML or OpenID. What is more, 
	the increasing user-management requirements will not require any development steps. Registration functionality needed?
	Yes, it's here.

. University wants to integrate its users with a national educational SAML federation.
[none]
- icon:check[role="green"] Unity can be a drop in replacement of other SAML IdP as Shibboleth. 
    And instantly delivers functionality
    of often needed add-ons (as Internet2 Grouper, authN extensions). It doens't require installation of an additional 
    user databases (as LDAP) - everything is included. And even better, Unity can still expose the legacy local LDAP
    instance if needed too.
        
. Commercial company wants to enable an advanced authentication for their suite of cloud applications:
  multifactor authentication (MFA) for sensitive management applications and social network logins for customer-oriented
  interfaces. Still with an ability to control who uses what, how often, block unwanted users, 
  with user profile management UI for the users.
[none]
- icon:check[role="green"] This is the same situation as in the first use-case: it is only a matter of 
  a different configuration of Unity.
		
. University, which is already integrated with a SAML federation, wants to join also another SAML federation.
[none] 
- icon:check[role="green"] Instead of setting up (and what is much worse: maintaining) 
      a second instance of IdP service, Unity can expose
      several SAML endpoints, with different configurations, so the new federation can be joined immediately.
		    
. Organization wants to offer its web resources to several SAML federations. At the same time people authenticating 
  with the social logins as Google accounts should be let in to, but only after filling a registration form and 
  after successful vetting by the organization's staff.
[none]
- icon:check[role="green"] Unity allows for arbitrary number of configuration of authentication 
  endpoints and sources. The above task 
  can be simply achieved by using several Unity authentication configurations together and the ability
  to define and deploy registration forms. Of course registration can be bound only to some designated authentication
  pipelines.
 		
     
      

=== Details for IT professionals

Internally Unity is composed of two parts: 

 - An orchestration platform, or a container of highly specialized extensions.
 - A rich (and growing) set of extensions providing support for the actual Unity features.
 
Unity extensibility is the the core concept, and there are no exceptions to this rule. For instance 
each and every supported credential type is an extension, there are no 'hardcoded' ones.

The core platform provides persistence of the service state (i.e. managed entities, attributes, groups, etc),
extensions management, orchestration and several cross cutting features. Such core features
are preferences management, notifications, registrations support etc. 
 
Unity is written solely in Java 8, which is the single, hard installation requirement. All used technologies 
are as lightweight as possible. Unity works as set of services available via an embedded HTTP server 
(Jetty). Therefore there is no need to install it on top of an existing HTTP or servlet server, or 
even worse to setup a JEE container. 

The most of the Unity functionality is controlled via its rich Web Admin interface. Some, rather low-level 
subsystems need to be set up in configuration files. 


image::./figures/local.png[alt="Powerful, built-in Unity identity management subsystem",align="center",scaledwidth="50%"]



[glossary]
=== Glossary: General Unity concepts

Below a glossary of key terms which are used throughout this manual is presented.

Endpoint::
 Unity provides a portfolio of access modules. Those modules are called _endpoint types_. 
 Each endpoint type can be deployed multiple times, with different configuration. A deployed and configured endpoint type
 is called an _endpoint instance_ or just an _endpoint_ for short. Examples: Web Admin UI is an endpoint type providing 
 web browser management access; SAML SOAP authentication is enabled by another endpoint.

Authenticator::
 It is a configured authentication component which can perform a full authentication using a single credential 
 with a well defined way to obtain it from the principal being authenticated. Authenticators are associated 
 with endpoints. 

Authentication Realm::
 It is a simple group of endpoints, which share login sessions. Client logged to one of realm's endpoints
 is immediately logged to all other endpoints of the realm. Authentication realms are used to control login session
 settings.  

Entity::
 Entity is used to describe a principal that can try to authenticate using Unity, have assigned attributes etc.
 In practice it is a user or software agent. We can say that in the first place, Unity is a tool to manage and authenticate entities.
 
Identity::
 Each entity can have one or more representations.  Each representation is called identity. Identities have its type,
 as _username_ or _X.500 Distinguished Name_ (DN) which defines its syntax, equality rules etc. If an entity has 
 several identities attached, then all are equivalent. This is used to provide aliases for the same principal,
 at the same time supporting different authentication systems, which represent principals in different ways.
 Identities are used during authentication (think about user name or email address used in login form or to match
 external user with the local one).   

Credentials (local)::
 Credentials are associated with entities and are used to perform local authentication of an entity. When authentication
 is done using a remote IdP, then the local credential is not used. Therefore some entities may have no local 
 credentials, if only the remote authentication is allowed for them. Each credential implementation may be configured 
 differently and each configured credential is called _credential type_.   
 For example there is a password credential implementation, which can be configured two times: as a _secured password_
 which requires 3 character classes and minimal length of 8 characters and as a _simple password_ with
 less strict requirements. 

Credential requirement::
 Credential requirement is a simple, named set of credential types. Credential requirement is assigned to an entity 
 and defines which credential types make sense and can be used for the entity. Using credential requirements, the
 ordinary system users may have a simple password credential type assigned, managers a secured password and 
 administrators tuple of secured password and certificate to employ a more secure authentication. 

Attributes and attribute types::
 Attributes are assigned to entities to express their characteristics. For instance a _birthDate_ attribute 
 may be used to express the birth date of an entity. Attributes are always 
 assigned in a concrete group, so the same entity can have different attributes depending on the group.
 This is very useful in many situations e.g. to provide different user characteristics for different consumers. 
 Attribute can have from zero to many values. Values must have a common syntax, Unity
 supports several syntaxes as string or JPEG photo. Attribute has its type, which define the rules for 
 the attribute in the system, in the first place its name and values syntax and the cardinality of values.   

Group::
 Groups are nodes in a tree-like structure and contain entities. Groups are hierarchical, i.e. each member
 of a subgroup must be the member of the parent group. Groups not only are used to logically group/sort members but
 provide additional automatic content management features as automatic attributes assignment via attribute statements. 

Attribute statements::
 Attribute statements are defined in a group. Attribute statement automatically assigns an attribute to selected 
 members of the group. For instance an attribute statement can copy an attribute X for all users who has the  
 X attribute in a parent group to the current group (what enables attributes propagation). Another statement
 can create an attribute which will expose identities as values of an attribute. 

Attribute class::
 Attribute class defines which attributes (more properly: which attribute types) are allowed and/or mandatory. 
 Attribute class is assigned either to a group (then it governs the settings for all group members) or to a specific
 group member. Attribute classes can be organized in a hierarchical structure, where more complex classes inherit 
 definitions from basic classes.

Upstream or remote IdP::
 An external service which is used by Unity to perform authentication. Upstream IdPs can return more information about
 the authenticated user (besides the fact that the user correctly authenticated with as a given identity). Unity is
 able to make use of this information: translate it and insert to the local database. This is done with _translation profiles_.

Translation Profile::
 See the above point.